here we go 5 4 3 2 1
first of all how many people get your
name wrong when they try to pronounce it
well so many people I don't even care
anymore however it comes out because I
live in it's a funny name where I come
from right from England who grown up
with a funny name but in Mexico is even
stranger name so I just normally make it
in and my second name gorilla which in
Spanish is Glee yo right so everyone I
messed that up too if they see it
spelled yeah this microphone about a
fist from your face right yeah there we
go
um Yohan I don't think I've ever heard
that name before there's an actor called
young Gruffudd was the end he's in
Fantastic Four oh really
he's the stretchy guy oh no sure in
Fantastic Four so yeah he kind of he's
made that name a little bit more a
little bit more so how did you wind up
live in Mexico City so I I came to
Mexico or went to Mexico in the year
2000 and I kind of messed around for a
few years in the UK wanted the game to
journalism so I found one way to get
into it was to start working in a
foreign country rather than going to my
local newspaper and work and go to a
foreign country and start working and I
had a romantic idea about Latin America
thinking I'd be like I saw the movie
Salvador ah you know all of us Stones
movie for me yes I kind of had I had a
romantic idea about running around with
guerrillas fighting military
dictatorships so I arrived in Mexico in
2000 and got a job at an
english-language newspaper how old we 27
when I first left the UK yeah 28 when I
messed around for a bit in Mexico as
well I didn't got a job when I was 28
Mexico City's a wild place yeah yeah so
packed it's it's hard to but I've only
been there twice for UFC events yeah
but every time I'm there I'm just
shaking my head like I can't believe how
this traffic works it's crazy yeah 18
years nothing a lot of time in that
traffic nobody cares about red lights
green lights they don't care it's
stressful everyone cut wants to cut you
up all the time yeah people shouting you
a lot you have to get used to people
calling you like been deckle Sarah go to
I different tactics now just try and
relax and not get angry did you know how
to speak Spanish before you went there
yeah
yes I spent one year in Spain living in
Spain before I went now it's been a year
in the Middle East as well and but yeah
I started off when I arrived I spoke
more to Spanish Spanish which is like
all yet deal gone your deal and then
unchanged more to like the Mexican
Spanish which is like or a way kept us
away right
yeah so when did you start getting into
narco journalism so like I arrived to
say with a romantic idea about what I
might cover in in Mexico or Latin
America and right away I realized all
that idea of gorillas and military
dictatorships that gone that was the
last century mmm che Guevara all that
stuff had gone but right away when I
arrived my very first thought first like
back in the UK I grew up around a lot of
drugs in the UK so going back to the 80s
I grabbed a lot of people taking drugs I
had a few friends who died from heroin
overdoses back then for people I knew
died of herring overdoses I had a sister
who went who became schizophrenic
smoking a lot a lot of why not she which
became schizophrenic and there'd be a
lot of drugs being smoked around that
time as well was it part yeah back then
it was Moroccan hashish there's that
there is a connection you know and we've
been exploring that a lot lately
yeah we went into this marijuana debate
between Alex Berenstein and dr. Mike
Hart from Canada and we talked about it
and I know people that have had that
happen to them where they've had
schizophrenic or psychotic breaks
because of just massive doses of
marijuana and especially people that
don't do it or people that do it too
much for too long it does happen
I heard that debate that's one of the
reasons why it came to mind I mean I
don't know a lot of people smoke weeds
yeah well it's fine now when when my
sister had a breakdown when she was 18
and I was 16 at the time and when that
came out it turned out also my my
grandmother had an issue with
schizophrenia
right and I think I don't it was a time
bomb waiting to go on yeah or if it was
how much
the the the hash was involved in that
there's other issues as well so I don't
really know the science of it but anyway
going back so so I've been around a lot
of drugs before so when I arrived in
Mexico actually one of the first first
arriving in Mexico ended up hanging
around with some some people and they
were smoking a lot of crack in Mexico
it's one of some of the first people I
met Wow
I was I went down to the beach like
backpacking down to the beach and these
people were smoking smoking crack and I
was like it's kind of strange I didn't
know these people smoking crack down
here so when I got a job at the local
newspaper in English and I just started
looking at the crime thing one of the
first doors I did was on the issue of
crack being sold locally and how that
linked to cartels and then very soon
just fell in right away like I said all
these things happened by accident I just
fell into covering the crime beat misses
going back to 2001 so 2001 that's the
same year that chapo guzman escaped from
prison then I was calling a lot then - a
great journalist from Quanah head who's
Glenn Cornelis you know a real legend
from Tijuana who survived the shooting
bye-bye cartels and you know phoning him
up all the time just getting him give me
information can be tips and that was
however least I wonder our big story I
did it back of those days was the
court-martial of some generals for drug
trafficking and that was really where it
began back then
generals for drug trafficking how much
of an issue is that I mean corruption
must be unbelievably rampant so I mean
corruption even isn't a strong enough
word for it sometimes I call it state
capture I mean silly this is a real
beginning and this has been a whole
crazy 18 years of covering this stuff
means this is a very beginning battery
and I've seen a whole lot of for a crazy
stuff in that time but like just to get
a sense of how bad the corruption is or
what it really means on the ground level
there like there's policemen like you
interview policemen you get to know the
policemen in a certain town certain city
and it's hard to know you know how all
military guys or politicians and you
want to believe these are good people
you want to believe there's good
policemen out there who really want to
stop crime
so there's one policeman his nickname
was theis a Dyson like Mike Tyson his
nickname was Tyson he was a well-built
bloke well-built guy and he was friendly
with the press forgot from michoacn
friendly with the press and then it came
out that he was actually a drug cartel
member ranking member in a drug cartel
and he actually confessed they they used
to have a thing were the police the
federal prison when they got him got him
to confess on camera and he confessed
not only was he turning a blind eye not
only was he carrying out murders he was
training the young kids how did the
capitate people how to cut people up and
he was explaining in graphic detail how
he like you know how they managed to cut
limbs off how he gets young people
trained them to cut limbs off to get
them to lose their fear so that's the
level of corruption that could be a
policeman you're dealing with and that's
really who they are so that's one of the
crazy things about a corruption down
there did you have any hesitancy in
getting involved in narco journalism
knowing this I mean I would imagine
that's one of the most dangerous avenues
to pursue in journalism so this was
little by little involved in covering
this so like going back to 2000 this
hadn't happened this war hadn't happened
it was still like a crime issue at that
moment so I began to cover these things
and then around 2004 I got a job for the
Houston Chronicle out of Houston Texas I
was covering I was a string of covering
Mexico for them and I flew up to a lot
to Nuevo Laredo and there was a turf war
beginning there which is really the
beginning of the drug war which is torn
Mexico apart began on the border with
Texas in this city called neue red all
over the bridge from Laredo Texas back
in 2004 so there was a lot of interest
from the Texas newspapers what was going
on there's a whole bunch of bodies
piling up there but again this go back
these days and this is kind of innocent
looking back innocent looking at myself
then an innocent looking at what Mexico
is like then they would simply say go to
the place I'll draw up the Montero
I rent a car and just drive the car - no
Blair either with bus by myself and now
he would just don't do that it's just
too much crazy stuff come on but back
then it was still like oh you can just
do that so there was when you say crazy
stuff like what kind of crazy stuff I
mean now you can get stopped by an armed
group driving on those roads he could
you could just drive along and it could
be a group of guys with guns could stop
the car get someone out takes take you
away I mean there's a whole people a lot
more careful about you know way now now
when I'm when you move around the roads
you could be very careful how you move
and how you plan this stuff you didn't
wonder by yourself drive around these
places so so back then when this was
happening and there was a these bodies
turning up and I'm trying to figure out
why and I there was one guy interviewed
who was a head of chamber of commerce
and I talked to him you know very
interesting guy about a couple of weeks
later he became the Chief of Police for
the city and they asked him I said are
you scared
you know you scared about being killed
it's a normal scared it's only the
corrupt people who get killed and he was
shot dead six hours after he gave that
statement they shot him dead and that
was one of the real markers of something
really strange is going on in Mexico
something is like gonna erupt in Mexico
and then from there it kind of just
escalated and escalated and started work
by the other media Time magazine New
York Times different people in off the
water said I can't do this I can't just
write new stories about it's gotta write
books about this okay this stuff is big
and it's complicated
it must be immensely complicated for the
people that live there it seems like
there's no escape I mean if you can't
turn to the police the police are the
cartel there's the cartel the police all
the politicians most likely if they're
alive have to be compromised yeah I mean
there's been some very very desperate
people and I mean there's been some very
there's been some inspirational people
as well fighting this there's been
heroes there are heroes just to get more
of a sense of what that means on the
ground as well you know and some of the
things you see you know some of the
things that stay with me enough
for a while it was quite romantic
covering this it was like wow I'm
covering I'm going to these places where
chapo guzman is from no I got the
villager me his mother me his family I'm
wrong about these these crazy people but
then you start seeing that the human
pain in all of this one of many stories
that the stick with me was a mother in
Monterrey a schoolteacher you know when
you have armed guys moving around
they're also like really affecting the
civil population attacking the civil
population and one mother she was in our
home with her two children in Monterrey
and a it was like in the night just
chilling in their house and then the
door broke down and about 15 guys in
bulletproof jackets all came in long
arms just taking stuff from the house
held the family we're not pinned him
down and they said to the mother which
of your children is the oldest and she
was like didn't her reply I mean which
of your children the oldest how do i how
do I reply to that she just couldn't
speak and the eldest side you had two
sons 118 115 the 18 year old was a
philosophy student and he said I am on
the oldest said okay you're coming with
us and took him away the next day she
got a phone call saying I could we've
got your son give us this amount of
money we'll give him back so she went
round to our relatives just got the
money she wants give the money right
away she turned up with the money gave
some money and then they just cut off
the causes she hadn't heard from him
since and I have been seeing her face
the devastation and the paints that I
just couldn't can go on my life after
that and just not knowing not having a
closure and I met her when I went to
report on one of the worst atrocities
which was 49 bodies had all been
decapitated all had their hands and feet
cut off and all been dumped on a road
and they were taken to the morgue in
Monterrey and I arrived at the morgue us
I was inside the morgue just smelling
the smell of the dead bodies it's kind
of weird snow you get from like decaying
flesh kind of course
smell you get from when you're around
those places but you can smell that the
bodies decay and I was inside the morgue
and I came out he was outside the morgue
and she was trying to see if if her son
might be among those people among those
bodies but you know it's it's so insane
that this is right next door to America
and there's so little effort put on
doing something about it including doing
something to mitigate the influence of
illegal drugs by making drugs legal and
that would be one gigantic step you
you're not going to stop people from
doing drugs I mean this is an illogical
ridiculous approach I don't think people
should do most of those drugs but when
you make drugs illegal only criminals
are gonna sell those drugs and this is
exactly what you have right next door to
America it's just unbelievably insane
that there's this amount of crime a
drive away from San Antonio yeah and
talking about that issue of the money
and the economics of this yes so I mean
you look at cocaine so you could tell
you what the there was four main drugs
now it's you've got fentanyl coming in
as well in the drug and the cartels and
making fentanyl stir making making it
yeah and made in the making of bringing
in precursors making it there's a lab
one lab I was in Nogales about a year
and a half ago if they bust the lab in
Nogales right on the border they'll make
them have a lab they're making the
Fenton even bringing up here but as well
as that you've got other four main drugs
historically marijuana heroin cocaine
and crystal meth and this goes back 100
years like so Sinaloa which is the
cradle of Mexican drug trafficking
Sinaloa's be like Sicily is to the Mafia
lifes in the lowest in the Mexican drug
cartels where it began and he began
right so you go back to 1914 you had in
the US the Harrisons narcotics tax act
when they made they restricted opium and
cocaine in the United States and from
1915 they began a cross-border trade
from Mexico to the United States so
that's when it started all the way back
then so every one hundred years ago some
of the very
people doing it we're actually Chinese
Mexicans they were Chinese immigrants
who arrived from Mexico they began doing
this they bought opium from from China
planted in in Mexico and some of the
first people receiving it with Chinese
Americans some of this very early cases
a case from 1916 investigate their
documents about this case where there
was Chinese Mexicans trafficking two
Chinese Americans here in California and
at that time there was a governor of
Baja California involved right back then
what is the solution is there any
solutions to this well I mean it I get
you know I think a lot of people
covering this you get very weary you
want to see solutions yeah you want to
find solutions and you want to come with
that optimism of finding solutions and
you want to justify why you're doing
this what you're doing is for you to
tell the stories but to look for
solutions to this and it gets worried
about that there's three areas I believe
that are solutions first I do agree with
you on the idea of drug policy reform
again it is tough uphill battle I mean
are going back to 2012 I wrote
editorials about you know one of the
reasons you should legalize marijuana is
because of the marijuana come from
Mexico which goes to cartels which pays
for killers which pays for corruption
but at the same time marijuana a lot of
you know love is legalized in the United
States and the violence that she just
got worse in Mexico so you've also got
the issue of heroin cocaine crystal meth
fentanyl and you've got the cartels go
into a bunch of other
rackets now they still crude oil which
is a big deal they still billions of
dollars worth of crude oil criminals
down there from pipelines he doesn't tap
into a pipeline or something yeah you
kind of pipeline yeah you know they put
in two taps you drill two holes in the
pipeline you drill a hole to put to take
the oil out you drill a hole to put
water in to try and keep it equal the
pressure the same never you saw it's a
crazy video recently in a small town in
Mexico where a bunch of there was a tap
open a really a really bad tap the oil
just sprang out and a bunch of people
were lining up just to pick up the oil
from the pipeline
and exploded and just it was just like
crazy death toll you know I did see that
from from from nada but a bad way that I
do believe in in drug policy reform we
have to talk about this has to be on a
table I mean Americans you know no one
knows really what Americans spend on
drugs but as this survey we you can find
online if you just you know tap and what
do Americans spend on illegal drugs and
it there's an estimate of a hundred
billion dollars a year so you know that
amount of money I mean that's an
estimate I mean it could be right you
know hard to know it's a very round
number but like 100 billion dollars a
year now if you think about that pumping
into these cartels year after year I
mean decades you know how much of that
you know if it's thirty billion of that
going down in Mexico and over ten years
three hundred billion over 30 years
close to a trillion dollars that really
creates this dis monster
burn our second area so I'm not believe
in drug policy reform I mean I don't
know how I mean rehab everyone who needs
it because heroin addicts buy a lot of
heroin so everyone you save from that
you can you know you can stop a lot of
heroin and a lot of that money which
does money goes to these people who are
doing this stuff but a second error I
believe is is social work in the
neighborhoods like I've talked a lot of
interviews with particularly with the
assassins with the killers in cartels in
Mexico and also around Latin America
I've been traveling around Jamaica
Brazil Central America Colombia talking
to a lot of the killer's especially and
when I sit down with the my truncate
their life story now how did they first
get into this because you're not born
doing this stuff and often I mean in
some cases that is the different
profiles some of them you know this one
one guy this is dad in Honduras which is
also crazy situation
there's a guy there I actually met him
before I'd met him when I was doing some
reporting down there back in 2015 and he
was driving for us and he was also
carrying a gun to help protect us with
the journalists who had a her dad who'd
been hit before I've been actually shot
before
and then I met him again after his
income to tell his story which is kind
of typical of love these guys and he
described how he been abandoned as a kid
by his parents and had this real hate
that he had with the world like and I
just fucked the world and he described
the first time that he carried out a
murders and it this is just I mean he
carried out they already talked he
documented all these hits he'd done and
decapitations he'd done and this kind of
crazy stuff but the first time he had a
murder was probably that the freakiest
when he was then 14 and they got a
family
they went into a house couldn't work
they got family and they butchered a
family and he described when he
described that and then described later
on you know how he became a hired killer
and the thing about him like some of
these people we think they're
Psychopaths they just they really don't
care but some of them really do have
these conflicts inside their heart I
think he was someone or list about that
interview and he had and it's hard to
balance that someone who does evil but
also has been a victim as well a victim
and victimizer and he feel that pain
since since then he's himself been being
murdered but yeah he was you know one so
how you get social work to reach people
from a very young age because often they
recruited into organized crime when at
twelve thirteen years old so he
butchered his family when his fourteen
was he stealing money from them Rosie so
the story would that was he said that he
was hanging around with these basically
street kids and one of the other kids
said I know where there's some money in
the house we can get some money in a
house so they went in there and killed
his family and it turned out there was
no money there and the reason the other
kid had said go there was because he'd
actually been living with his family and
he said they've been abusive to him so
he wanted to like revert have revenge on
his family well what was so really
that is too when he was describing it
was they had this family and they would
to stop them defending themselves they
would like take them one by one lap in
demeanor in a room and take them one by
one I take them out butchered them how
the other ones didn't really know what
was going on and think I mean the action
itself but how like teenage kids can
think about that stuff and then later on
when he was talking about the
decapitations he was talking about they
get contracts with decapitation inside
the court like they say look we want
this killing we wanted to decapitate a
guy we won this doctor want to see video
of the guy being the Capitec we want
that we want to go to suffer I'm when he
hacks the heads off there sometimes
still be a moment when when the life
goes out of them and when the body is
still like twitching like he says they
can still see like was there's a bit
like nerves I was like a chicken like a
headless chicken there's a bit it's a
part when they're still like twitching a
bit even after they you know they've
lost it kind of seven their connections
there now when you're interviewing these
people how nervous are you
I mean this seems like if you're putting
all this stuff down you could implicate
them and some crimes and it seems like
it would be very convenient for them to
try to get rid of you
so does there's a whole bunch of
different situations around interview so
sometimes I've interviewed people in
prisons a lot of time in prisons um you
know this took me years to get to a lot
these people first of all you know no it
wasn't like when I first started doing
this I was like oh how do I get how do I
reach them and start going out to drug
rehab places and talking to people in
drug rehab I'm going into prison since
it out wireless I did a lot of
interviews in one prison I got to know a
lot of prisoners in the presidency Doris
in a Christian evangelical wing there
and they were going through his weird
Christian you know like Cristiano a
discovery of God there and then through
this too on the street often like
through contact I mean were all the time
through contacts on the street in in
Honduras a lot of great contact with a
friend is a journalist who grew up in
his neighborhood
these guys it snows loads of these guys
from growing up now there's different
different things you know there have
been bad situations I think anybody
covered this has had some bad situations
sometime people get angry people
threaten them and so forth but a lot of
the time when you talk to people and one
things you have to be very a lot of time
you have to be very stringent about
protecting their identity and really
serious about that because there's been
cases where various cases what other
people have interviewed killers and
shown the identity either through the
showing their face or through like some
dumb thing being shown and they have
been themselves murdered in a butchered
after these they've given these
interviews or like other things that
happened they've been threatened or
something their family or arrested or so
forth so you've really got to protect
people's identities in a way in terms of
when they talk and stuff and I don't
really feel nervous when I leave it all
these people I probably feel more
nervous hit that's just what it's like
on a big show it's a different a
different thing when you're like talking
to first you know you start with easy
questions like anything you start
talking about how you know how you you
know people human the human beings and
people have got it people are
complicated and I haven't just
interviewed it I've also got drunk with
some of these people and hung around
with some of these people for time
trying to get closer like you know I
spent time to try and understand their
world a bit more what's the most time
we've ever spent with these people I
mean several days several days yeah like
you know I mean now see them see him
again hang out with you know hang out
with them in different places not all
the time sometimes just you know sit
down do interviews and just leave but
it's it's complicated world for them is
it's their normality knows if for them
is normal it's what they've what they've
lived what they've been through what's
happening around them I mean this level
of murder this happening a lot of parts
of Latin America now it's crazy but in
these areas is where he talked to other
people who had just
on the edge of this well her family
members involved in this and it's just
they're living this I mean these are
levels of violence and it's interesting
to compare historically these levels of
violence because you look at some of the
worst cities like San Pedro Sula
Honduras Caracas I'm Sara Juarez and
these are places which have levels of
violence which are like way worse than
medieval Europe a lot place in medieval
Europe I mean look at the figures per
hundred thousand because some of them
have over a hundred four hundred
thousand 150 behind a thousand and
medieval Europe a lot these cities were
like twenty four hundred thousand so
they're way worse now way worse in the
Wild West than like now there are some
place in the United States the de la
Owen idea I've done some research
recently in Baltimore Maryland and I was
kind of it's interesting to compare that
to Latin America and that's high level
as forty four hundred thousands that's
that's not as the same level but it's
significant still more than medieval
Europe yeah Wow
Baltimore's worse than medieval Europe
yeah I mean I think it's you have to
have to some professors there might in a
like you get like you know there might
be they might say well Jerusalem in this
time or in a line I like you got triumph
we nice hard to know it really dig down
exactly that there was outbreaks of
violence and killing in samples but the
overall our yeah of all average yeah
that's a significant leap 100 percent
leap yeah absolutely
Baltimore what about South Side Chicago
it's not that I mean like the level I
think in Chicago comes out around 20 or
something so it's not now the American
of the whole city
now these again and one of things about
the violence in the United States
compared to Latin America when Baltimore
is is significant but it's a fairly what
the city of Baltimore is a fairly small
place what they're talking about so in
Mexico you have entire states that are
like really violent or entire countries
in Latin America whereas in the US it
tends to be neighborhoods which are
violent so if you really focus on the
south side of Chicago it's probably
similar levels to Baltimore I think you
know it sir but if you look at the whole
city got neighbors that are pretty safe
in Chicago as well now through all of
this time
that you've spent down in Mexico have
you seen it you've seen it escalate
you've seen it get worse and worse yes
so there was first this really big
escalation happened in 2008 was the
first big escalation what was the cause
of that so you had there was a steady
buildup that was happening and then in
2006 do you had the President Felipe
Calderon declared a military crackdown
on drug cartels and after that with
there was this big response and things
started really getting out of hand we
had already seen violence escalating
before I think you know my idea my kind
of theory behind this is that you had in
Mexico back in a 20th century more of a
top-down centralized government
controlling everything you had the PRI
in power and they were basically they
were hauling it through corruption so
back then they'd have the drug cartels
working for them an interesting story
going back then to the 19 late 1970s
story in a book called drug lord by
Terrence popper who interviewed a a drug
trafficker in the eighties when he got
the his job as the jefe de plas which is
the head of a certain territory when he
got the job he went with the State
Police at a time and said I want to
become the head of the placer and they
took him in and tortured him for two
days and like and I beat the crap out of
him put electric shocks on his nuts one
of the big tortured in Mexico put water
laced with chili in his nose smell one
of his big say your whole face burns
these are like torture techniques they
have and after two days of torture who
said yeah well done you know you
survived well you've got the job so we
know what it shows is that the police
had the upper hand to please control
this they were like okay we control this
racket and you know we can fuck around
and torture and kill drug traffickers
when we like you know in all up the
presidency I mean there was uh in that
time Carlos Salinas became president 94
his brother Raul Salinas there's the
Swiss investigate his bank accounts and
said
at 500 million dollars in bank accounts
we say you know they they believed it
was drug money
so right up to the presidency this was
being run when makes a code change
democracy so when I arrived in Mexico
was changing to democracy is like wow
great democracy is gonna happen free
markets gonna happen you know in the
good days of the 21st century now but
what happened was you look the political
control shifted so you had a bunch of
different political parties and they
were fighting over the drug trade and
you know I was one time in rebel arezzo
when the federal police had a shootout
with the municipal police they were
fighting each other probably cuz they
work for different drug cartels so
that's what started but then you had the
techniques like the technique of
beheading wasn't really a big deal it
was very very rarely used up until
around 2006 and one of the first
incidents was in Acapulco in 2006 in
about June 2006 now it might have been
after inspired by the al Qaeda sakal we
in a video which was shown in full of
Mexican TV remember when that came out
and they decapitated the guy in Iraq and
they decapitate first it was two
policemen a decapitated later that year
in September 2006 there was five heads
they rolled onto a disco dance floor and
then his thing just became just
escalating just became this kind of like
using his terror of public terror so
2006 2008 was a big escalation and then
2011-12 were like crazy and then it
subsided a bit in a pub the violence got
a bit less public and it was more like
hidden like mass grave stuff and the
worst mass grave that's been discovered
so far was in Veracruz I've been to the
side of it and it was 250 bodies were
found in this mass grave in one place
and it was right next to a housing
estate and there's families he was so
one of the saddest things was you cqc
their kid his bicycles and basketball
hoops and stuff right next to this
and the field next to that they dug up
250 bodies and the smell was like
emanating to this housing estate and
it's a kind of middle club the dream of
becoming middle-class that was the the
kind of sums in this housing state and
right next to it this violence but when
I say a lot of these stories and I mean
these are crazy stories but I love make
the weird thing is a lot of Mexico lives
a normality around this it's not what
you say this is not what you say every
day this is this happens but there's
also just a normality that could just be
like you're outside here in LA in normal
people living normal lives around this
as well what is the response in Mexico
what it would mean after they wanted to
have this military action against the
cartels obviously that hasn't really put
a dent in it would it would with the the
current thought process behind dealing
with this so there's been out there was
a bunch of like citizen protest
movements various times during these
recent years and one of them was it was
a very interesting guy called Javier
Sicilia who's a poet and a writer whose
son was murdered and he when it first
happened his son was murdered and he
just came out says the press where is
likely not gone it's just like this is
just Mexico's going I can't I can't deal
with my son's being killed and then he
began talking in very you know and he
went to the streets and people coming
out publicly crying and it was one of
the first times there was a realization
a lot of innocent people dying with this
and people come out in you know I went
to some of these things people come out
crying family members and she I see a
sense we're victims here because there's
a for a long time a sense is simply bad
guys killing bad guys and that wasn't
the case now the current president
Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador
who just won the election last year and
just took power on December 1st so he's
got to mix things so one of them is this
idea of the wars over I'm gonna create
peace we can have forgiveness
reconciliation
you know piss hardly know what that
really means and his second thing is we
need to have more of a unified state
police so like what I described before
about you had local police fighting the
Federal Police
so we got to have so he's got this idea
now the National Guard which is a kind
of hybrid between military and police
being around and that's basically his
his these kind of two thrusts he's in
now he's only been in power a couple of
months January was still a bad month in
terms of murders in terms of bodies last
year was third more than 33,000 dead
last year which is the size of Mexico's
equivalent of the United States having
close to a hundred thousand now matching
what that would mean in the United
States if you had that many people dying
in a year a month the whole year in the
year
now when these people are when they're
being recruited by the cartels when the
police officers are being recruited the
the big issue must be will there must be
two issues right safety like if they
don't join the cartel they probably get
murdered and to the amount of money the
cartel would give them would be far more
than the government would give them to
be a legitimate police officer yeah sure
that's like known famously platinum
blonde plateau plateau plumber like
silver or let you want to have the
silver of the bribe the LED of the
bullet but but even beyond that for long
time a lot of these people who joined
the police I like from the beginning
they're you know I've talked I've got
I've got on video made a video back in
2010 in Sierra Harris of a bunch of
rappers just hanging around in the
middle of all this and one of their
friends was saying and they were talking
and these people saying you know some
have been done for taking drugs over the
border they've been in gangs and stuff
how Morin was like I want to be a
policeman and and he was like I want to
be a policeman and make some money you
know basically through corruption so it
is like there's the mentality of some of
these people joining the police from
early on another guy guy opened open the
first book with is a guy who became a
policeman when he was 18 he was
basically a hard tough guy paid American
football from Durango became a policeman
when he was 18 and in the police learned
to torture and learn to murder he said
that's what I learned in the police and
I just started 20 after two years just
left the place and went full-time into
crime his life
so you know you've got a situation where
you know it's not you know it's worse
even it's beyond bad that the bad I look
up with my imagine of corruption so all
of this essentially is escalated from
the time you came to Mexico so when you
came to Mexico it's something like you
got in I mean if it was a story you got
in almost the perfect time yeah yeah
horrible way yeah yeah yeah yeah I mean
it's I mean like you know you don't do
these things on purpose
you know you don't think if I look back
20 years ago I'm it's 18 years I've been
in Mexico now I had Holden I've grown up
in Mexico in that sense you know never
look back and think that's and now in
terms of myself seeing this I mean it's
I mean nothing for anybody it's it's
paced painful I mean how you process
that level of death that level of murder
level of suffering it's it's it's it's
horrible stuff to see and it's you could
still have a lot of people separated
from that you know families people bring
up children and you know you want to
separate you know kids from that Soloff
often like middle-class kids in Mexico
quite sheltered because families want to
shelter them as much they can from from
from that violence and just you know not
let them see that side of things how
much of that do you have to deal with in
Mexico City so Mexico City you know is
about the same murder rate as Houston so
Mexico City is not super violent now
it's still not super safe but it's not
super violent so Mexico City is kind of
and there are parts of Mexico which are
which are fairly safe now
the state of Yucatan you know where
murderous is the same murder level as
Belgium so you've got aces within Mexico
where you don't have this level of
violence so Mexico City is it is a great
city Mexico City is a great city to live
in in many ways apart from the traffic
and the pollution and various things I
mean there's a bunch of things that are
I know and I love all of Mex
I love all of Latin America I love even
even the bad places are still love I
enjoy going to the place so I enjoy
meeting people they're gonna hang out in
these areas there's a lot of good things
about him still but dealing with all the
horrific tragedies that you report about
and experience do you look for an escape
route I mean oh you are you looking to
get the fuck out of Dodge
yeah I mean um there's been different
times where I thought you know I want to
stop this now and cover all of things
yeah as a journalist and he see other
journalists doing that as well as a
journalist called her Zeus has given a
great Mexican journalist who's just I
just thought about the trial of El Chapo
over in New York and who's been covering
this for years one of the really great
Mexican correspondences covered his drug
stuff and he was like he just said to me
oh butter I've got some stuff maybe I
can give you this is the I'm gonna this
is the last thing I'm gonna do
conferring trucks not really no we'll
see we'll see if that's true I think a
lot of time you know you get caught
still doing this stuff you know person
when you when you've covered something
people want more people are interested
litter and there's relevant to this I
think some of the other struggles beyond
like the the danger and stuff is simply
I mean with journalism's in a bad way I
love the media in a bad way and you're
simply getting no trying to be a
freelance journalist I love being a
freelancer and it's our lovely
independence I love being a write books
and travel and write magazine stories
and make documentaries and do these
things but like just have you know
having the economic base for that you
know it's to generate a lots in time now
I've been doing it have you personally
been targeted at all so there's a couple
of situations that had you know I mean
first I would I know I'm gonna have to
give some come respect and condolences
to so many colleagues Mexican colleagues
who have been murdered have been being
murdered threatened had to leave the
country and various things and they've
had it bad
including a friend a good friend a great
colleague called had about this
who was shot dead in 2017 may 2017 in
Kula can a guy I'd known since 2008
great guy got drunk with him in the
canteen a very generous guy around eight
books a charismatic I mean I really
loved a guy who was shot dead and many
other stories so so I kind of don't want
to give my own compare my own work to
lot of them in many ways but yeah sure
there's been times is one time in it was
in the state called Michoacan and this
was 2014 and there was a thing that
happened there when a lot of regular
people rose up with guns against the
cartels they were known as outer
defenses or like self-defense courts and
they rose up to fight the cartels and
they they a bunch of guys with guns it
was kind of crazy situation where there
was this luck almost like a trench
warfare happen between cartels and these
self-defense groups and then what
happened was a lot of regular gangsters
started saying oh we're self-defense
groups as well you know just coming up
said all year were self-defense groups
you know those guys were out on the
street with guns you know it's gonna go
out with our guns and so anyway I went
down I drove down at the end of this
I've been I've been covering this right
through and it had been fairly okay to
do the self-defense squads the other
defenses were pretty easy going to work
with but I drove down there to Michoacan
and I wanted to do some stuff on it and
Osman and me a friend journalist she
just backed out at the last minute
that's went down there anyway and
arrived there and there was about 50
guys arrived in this place near the city
called apatzingn and there was about 50
guys who supposedly a self-defense
scored in a parking lot getting ready to
go on a mission to try and take down
this drug trafficker called la deuda and
they were like they were sitting there
was a guy would like signing them up for
this kind of mission and there was a
bunch of guys they were and they had
very heavy weaponry they had ak-47s
their fifties they had grenade launchers
on there on there on the top of their
guns and beneath their guns
they had like grenades strapped to them
lastly create some belts around them
ammunition belts around him
I'm not crazy like you know like you see
that old revolutionary stuffing I mean
like real crazy like this Baradei stuff
and then I was talking and I realized
quickly these were not self-defense
classes would knock I these were
gangsters them they'd you know they came
how they're right over there like you
know how long you been in the
self-defense you know movement are
couple of days no no like and then they
had like guns with like diamonds and
jefe
what's-her-face then the boss and and I
was getting okay I was kind of like you
know joking with these guys and take
some photographs at him so they were
posing for photographs so they were
sitting there with like posing with
their guns and stuff in there and they
said they say they ever the word we're
always it's like it's not very white boy
it's like blondie you know it could mean
like you know you if you're you're white
in Mexico you often get called away
so like we're all how much the
prostitutes cost in your country you
have to go there to see in the light
where do you like take do you like
taking myth you don't you know you like
taking myth you know like I'm okay
and though they were still like nope I'm
joking and this guy turn came up among
them and he said yeah I'd say the other
guys there first there's a big guy and
he said he was carrying a big gun it's
got the woody massive head and he said
to me a bit aggressively just don't take
my photo
I'd like it no problem I won't take your
photo and then a guy came up and said to
the other guy say what are you doing
it's a DEA guy here it's a DEA agent
among you taking your photographs you
know what are you doing and I was like
I'm not even American I'm British and he
said no no you know this is a DEA guy my
my my brother was arrested in Texas and
the DEA guy pretended to be a journalist
that's some bullshit story and I said
look I couldn't you know I could show
you my website so they got the cell
phone out and and looked through the
cell phone and found my website
and the guy calmed down a bit and he
said you know if I see you I'm gonna put
a bullet in your head I'm gonna throw a
grenade at you he added so I left you
know I kind of tried to talk about a
left and yeah and then they went and
then I didn't publish the photographs to
God and I bought the photo ops and like
one of the guys sent me an email saying
what happened to photographs my emails
and my website so I just ignored it and
I think a lot of them got killed in a
big fight with the federal police
afterwards so that was one and this
vignette has been a few more so it's a
lot of touch and girl yeah in these
situations yeah the the federal police
do they have a plan to try to eradicate
these mobs or is it a lot of lip service
like is it really possible to eradicate
these gangs or is it just one of those
things where they say they're going to
do something but they have to kind of
protect themselves
you know this there's there's been
different different times I mean
sometimes there's been the Federal
Police have done well done after a
particular guy or sometimes with the
Americans you know there's been you know
arrests of very many significant
kingpins the problem is is well is that
the deeper questions is that like when
you take down some of these kingpins
who's got other people who will fight
over their same territory mmm so for
example you know you take out chapo
guzman and then you get a fight among
his sons and some I had one of his
lieutenants over it's over the Empire
now what's happened and one of the
reasons the violence is increased in
Mexico is because they've had this
onslaught attacking cartels over the
years then you end up with like the
lieutenants then taking over and then
their lieutenants taking over and then
their lieutenants taking over that's
what happened in Chicago as well all
right I spoke to a police officer in
Chicago and he said the violence
escalated afterwards some big gang
arrests and once they had gotten some
leaders of some gangs and other people
tried to fill the void he
exactly exactly so so so then you get
some of the people who are in power now
I like very young very violent people
and people who are not as smart when I
was not mature yeah so so you know so
you end up these they fragmented
territory so you have people controlling
rather than having big cartel some
leader who controls it and a half the
country you're not with these cartel
little are these gangs controlling a
part of a state there's one state called
Guerrero which you've seen this really
like cartel fragmentation and you've got
maybe 12 different groups in this one
state and you get like a place where
they you know one controls it along a
road and then in our group controls it
passing a certain point so there was
some some friends went up there seven
journeys went up there and got held up
on this road up there 2017 as well and
they got there in a car they're not
there two vehicles and about 200 guys
blocked the road and the leader of this
group was a guy I believe called aware
of pelea lie again his name blondie
Pelayo and he's like maybe 23 years old
like 200 guys there they said some of
the kids I talked with one of the
friends who was there and they said some
of these or kids who was the youngest
like 10 years old among this mob of
people and they they they held him up
they took away to one of the vehicles
they took away all their laptops cameras
all their equipment stuck them in a car
did go do you have to be careful when
you're traveling that you don't have
like an obvious expensive laptop or
camera something along those lines I
think from the point of view of is you
know they can they can take it away
I mean it's happened a lot lot of cases
recently colleagues just being robbed I
mean you get like an armed group and
they take away their basically their
hold them down take all their stuff so
you don't know so going on know various
colleagues photographers if you're a
freelance photographer all right and you
lose a good camera then then you know
like you know some of the TV people they
have they have less expensive cameras
and they used to I remember a few years
ago a TV crew interviewed some gang
members up in Honduras and they stole
their camera it was at that time was
like an 80,000
a camera and the TV network I say what
the TV network about who was more pissed
about losing the camera it was about
these guys you know King that's how I
know having guns pointed to them what is
the attitude in Mexico special amongst
people who are studying the narco wars
with all this built that wall stuff all
this what's going on in America there's
this this is very strange
right versus left polarization over here
about whether or not there should be a
wall between the United States and
Mexico sure I mean well I mean the thing
with Mexicans are obviously very anti
Trump in Mexico is you know from Trump
is very unpopular from the very
beginning you know when he said I know
they are rapists and murderers yeah
someone's doing the raping yeah I mean
he's kind of generally look at surveys
the level is very low does anybody like
my Trump in Mexico they're always
contrarian yeah I mean I've seen numbers
like you know people say like an 80
percent or something
I think he's terrible so it means there
must be a 20 percent somewhere don't I
haven't met a Mexican who's been like
pro-trump I mean I never have I met a
Salvadoran who was pro-trump one time in
in here he the guy had been deported and
he was like I know you agree you know
this guy Trump's gonna turn out to be a
great president so so I say that but now
Mexico is very very antitrump in terms
of the wall
I mean there's you know there in terms
of what it said of the smugglers my was
talking to a smuggler in Nogales about
this and he was describing he he'd smart
he was from Nogales from a neighborhood
called Buenos Aires which is right on
the border with the United States you
knows Nogales Sonora Nogales Arizona so
Nogales Sonora and there's Arizona and
he was from the neighborhood right on
the border there and he described that
he first took people over the border of
the United States back in the 1980s when
he was at school
he's a high school and the reason was
that time was just an old fence and
there was a hole in the fence these to
go through
into the United States and go back into
Mexico it's an old wire fence and the
first time he took people through people
would arrive from southern Mexico so you
know how do we get to the US and he'd
say ah you know this way and they give
him a tip he said the first time he got
the equivalent of about 50 cents was
what he made to take people to the
United States 50 cents nowadays the cost
of going to the US is five thousand
dollars that's what you paid to go
illegally into the United States five
thousand bucks
so you're saying wow look at that
increase every time that the US puts
more security
it means it's more expensive when it's
more expensive that means more money
going to criminals which means there's
no an industry doing it so now the
cartels make a big percentage of that
money of human smuggling into the US but
luck in terms of the wall I mean the
when Trump first came any at the line
that Mexico's gonna pay for it yeah and
and then it was this kind of line you
know right the beginning he kinda he
threatened Mexican president saying if
you if you don't agree to the pay for
the wall then why are you gonna come and
meet me and then it was like wow he's
really going to try and shake down
Mexico for like billions of dollars he's
really gonna try and do that and that
was kind of scary moment then I think
from the point of view of Mexico when he
first got the powers like he's gonna do
that and then he's gonna deport three
million and he's gonna you know he's
gonna kill NAFTA actually those things
haven't really come to pass actually if
you look over the last couple of years
of Crump has some really hit Mexico very
hard so the concern was that he was
going to take money that should be
allocated to other ways that's gonna
help Mexico and he was gonna try to take
that and use it to build the wall I mean
no one really knew when he first came in
he's like Mexico's gonna pay for this
wall right the wall just got ten foot
higher remembering that yeah it was like
it was like you know how you gonna do
that you can even start threatening
Mexico militarily and say give us money
I mean it was kind of like it was a
shakedown could this shakedown is kind
of it was kind of a crazy diplomatic
thing when he first got it so that was
kind of scary for a moment from the
point of view of Mexico but I think
after you look at the last couple of
years he hasn't really hit Mexico with
that now if he wants to build the
now there's the big fasten in terms of
the spending here but if he wants to
build it or extend its there is warden
sections in the board already if he
wants to extend it you know it won't
stop a lot of the hard drugs I mean if
you look at heroin cocaine crystal meth
high-value drugs they normally go
through the ports of entry right so
shipping yeah I mean the Gold's all
through the ports of entry through like
I mean you have through King cars right
cars trucks I mean you go through if you
look at the Laredo Loretto know though
one of the reasons that was a big fight
and war started there are mexico's
because I was very valuable territory
there's something like 8,000 trucks go
over that border every day now if you
have eight thousand trucks how many of
those can you search in a day and also
the way they can hide this stuff in
trucks they can hide drugs in like a
medal they can put them in Zinn in some
kind of metal container seal it up
solder it up put a bunch of stuff so it
doesn't smell so somebody has to say I'm
gonna open that with a blowtorch it was
a searching I have to rip that vehicle
apart right to find the drugs they were
putting them inside wheels yeah yeah in
the a that's like inside tires and stuff
like that I saw one that like there's
this song that's one of the older tricks
from your like the seventies there's a
song it is a one of the first narco
corridos the drug ballots it was called
contraband and true and treason from the
1970s and that was about hiring hiding
marijuana packing you know in tires hmm
back then but yeah I mean now the the
trap cars now like super sophisticated
they have some weird trap cars we have
to do like a bunch of stuff like open
the door move some stuff to actually to
actually open find the drugs others like
some trick sort of door has to be
activated yeah I would imagine if
there's a will there's a way and there's
that much I mean I remember hearing that
from it's not a reliable source but from
The Sopranos they were talking about
only 20% of all the shipping containers
to get brought into America gets
searched yeah
well that's that's crazy yeah absolutely
so so the
hard drugs going a lot of time through
on through the the ports of entry hmm
and and they have there another classic
trick they have is you get they allow
some to get busted so you allow one guy
to get busted hmm they set somebody up
so they're taking some drugs through
they get they get busted all the eff
energies on them and then meanwhile more
drugs are going through and is this the
United States border that's test that's
catching this guy yeah so they're not
getting tests they're not getting tested
in Mexico as they cross over right it's
only the United States border yeah some
sometimes they might catch him in Mexico
mmm sometimes but the majorities can be
the United States the United States
Border Patrol guys are they ever caught
being corrupt yeah absolutely yeah
there's been cases of u.s. Border Patrol
and customs entry people who have been
yea caught taking a bunch of money
taking bribes allowing allowing certain
cars through the course sound vehicle
through so yeah how does one fix this I
mean if you had a magic wand you were
gonna wave it over Mexico and fix this
problem
like if somebody said you on you're
smart you've been in the business for a
long we're gonna let you dictate how
this takes place so I'd say yeah three
things so like drug policy reform so
we've got to talk about how we deal with
this drug situation so I mean like
America I mean I mean oh the some of
that is is here isn't it and you
probably got better idea than me about
how to why America what Americans take
so many drugs I mean I come from a drug
taking community myself in the UK I
guess so maybe not that different
well I think there's a lot of answers to
that the biggest one is in entirely that
most people don't enjoy what they do and
they want an escape I think that's
probably the biggest one the there's
some ridiculous number that was just
were just who's discussing the number on
the podcast of how many people actually
was it it was a Johann Hari wasn't it
yeah he was talking about the number of
people that actually enjoy their job 67
percent people of in this country don't
like what they do or you know or just
just sleepwalking through their life
there's another significant percent that
hate what they do and then there's a few
left over that love what they do I mean
it's a very small number of people maybe
like myself or maybe like yourself that
actually enjoy what they do for a living
and feel like they're following their
passion most people are just working a
job and they fucking hate it and then
when they get off work they want to get
fucked up and a lot of these people you
know they're they have psychological
issues they're suffering from abuse
childhood abuse they're trying to I mean
there's been some significant statistics
about childhood abuse and how many
people from childhood abuse wound up
using and abusing drugs and becoming
addicted and even overdosing on drugs
and it's ridiculously high it's about
pain pain and suffering and trying to
remove that pain and suffering from your
life and you know people that don't know
how to make healthy choices and don't
have friends that are making healthy
choices and don't know what to do with
their life that's a big big part of it
there's another part of it that's it
because it's illegal
there's something about things that are
illegal that are intoxicating and
enticing you know when you look at the
statistics in Holland in particular
where marijuana has been you know you
could buy it in coffee shops forever not
that many people smoked marijuana in
Holland it's a lot of marijuana tourism
especially back in the day now that
America has legal marijuana of almost
everywhere and not a lot of people are
going to Holland specifically to get
fucked up but that was always the thing
man when we were younger it was always
like hey he's gonna go to Holland go get
high like I was to go to another
teenager I went over there for some of
that you know on a boat and arrived in
Amsterdam back in those days yeah the
actually it made me made me swallow it
smile what you saying just there about
enjoying the job and it's true I mean
when he said that I do love what I do
and enjoy what I do so that's can tell
you know one of the size of that thing
but but yeah so so I mean in terms of
you know the issue of drugs we have to
talk about this how can we stop
Americans stopped spending that money or
allowed that money is gonna be spent not
to be going to a black market and and
destabilizing these countries but also a
lot of issues in in Mexico as well like
getting that social work how do you
change the reality
and again to you know people who are
abused and suffer taking drugs but
people who abuse and suffer in Latin
America becoming assassins yes because
one of the weird things are not on a
moral level on a level of morality you
know I knew a lot of kids growing up who
sold drugs and it wasn't really an
amazing immoral thing to think about in
I sell drugs it was an easy step to take
I'm gonna simmer sell some weed and then
I'm gonna sell some speed and sell some
ecstasy and then later on a heroin
whatever but for somebody to commit a
murder that seems like a bigger you know
a lot bigger deal how do you get into
how do you cross that line to becoming a
murderer how do they cross that line so
easily well I think it goes back to that
young boy that you were talking about
that butcher that family he was
abandoned and angry and hurt and just so
much pain that he's suffering that's
often the case they want other people to
suffer when when you see people that are
doing terrible things to people they're
almost always suffering they're almost
almost always wanting other people to
feel what they feel they're lashing out
that's uh that that Social Work aspect
that you're discussing so critical and
something that we've discussed about
this country that how few people are
putting I mean the health end very few
politicians very few people that are
running this country are putting efforts
and to try to heal these communities
that have suffered from just years and
years of systemic racism years in years
of just embedded poverty that's almost
impossible to escape years and years of
crime and drugs and just growing up in
this community of despair and this is
what we were talking about with
Baltimore this is what we're talking
about with Southside Chicago and various
cities all over this country it just
they don't get better man they date stay
fucked up you know I had Michael wood
who is a police officer from Baltimore
and he was discussing what it was like
being in Baltimore as a police officer
and then looking at some documents from
the 1970s that detailed the crime in the
very same areas that he was patrolling
in and this the same crime in the same
areas and this sense of just
overwhelming futility like there was
nothing
that he was going to be able to do
there's gonna put a dent in this because
this was a lot of it was a product of in
these areas in Baltimore where there was
law that you were not allowed to sell
homes to black people in these certain
areas so they kept these people in these
poor areas and even though they had this
desire to escape into the the more
affluent or safer communities they
weren't allowed to for a long time
I mean there's so much of that in this
country that the you know the people
that are in control but everybody just
wants to get elected everybody just
wants to you know and then once they get
elected then they're looking to get
reelected so they spend a gigantic
percentage of their time campaigning no
there's no universal effort on the part
of all the citizens of the country to
try to look at all these areas and say
hey these are up this is us you know
just because you don't live in the
southside of Chicago that those are
human beings those are just like you and
I you could have been them they could
have been you if they were you and you
were them wouldn't you hope that you
would help wouldn't you hope that
someone would come in and try to fix
this area someone would try to portman
we pour so much money into foreign
countries we pour so much money into
subsidizing various industries that a
lot of people disagree with you know
when there's I mean I'm not an economist
I don't know what economic sense that on
any of that stuff makes but I do know
that money is allocated in a lot of
different ways and the idea is that it's
going to be better for all of us well
it's not better for all of us to keep
these communities as fucked up as they
are right now and there's no effort
nothing very little done no movement no
change no gigantic step no no ten year
plan to eradicate gang violence no ten
year plan to eradicate the illegal drug
sales and murder so the this great
social work there are some great social
workers down there so there are some
heroes in these places and there's
somebody I talked to a lot by sincere
awareness among cassandra who grew up in
his neighborhood she's one of the first
people introduced me to a young gang
members in this in this area she used to
work in a factory they're going to
Social Work now she's a psychologist and
she she's somebody who really will do
the work and reach people and I'm more
like save lives and you know some of
these my basic stuff you really get in
the community and trying to read
you have to reach the kids when they're
often 12 11 12 and you can often see in
these areas who the kids are going to
get into this who's gonna be recruited
by the cartels right who are gonna get
the gangs because there's certain
profiles in these people they haven't
got their families I was talking to some
guys in innocency raha whiteis from the
Barrio Azteca which is the one of the
big gangs they started in the u.s.
actually among prisoners and spread into
Mexico and became almost like a
paramilitary group in Mexico about how
they recruit people and then this guy
was saying like you know we will see no
I can see from these young kids who's
gonna be able to kill and you know who's
gonna be a real fighter and who's not
and if these people have gotten you know
parents you love them and so forth these
guys I'm gonna I'm gonna they're not
gonna work for me I need I need someone
who's like god I hate who's gonna hang
their name and right I can do something
with one of those who's kind of a
perverse opposite of this stuff really
but so if people don't have that
families and this makes me I guess think
a bit more sympathize I guess as well to
you know the idea of how how important
family is
yeah how important loving parents is you
know whether you're together or
separately non loving parents you know
having that and but if you don't have
that you know you need social work and
need people looking to offer something
and try and now those are an interesting
mayor of midian good and risk Waddell
and he had these ideas of trying to
change the reality of this city and he
said I'm gonna build the most he was a
mathematician so I'm gonna misuses a
mathematical problem this issue and I'm
gonna build the most beautiful building
in the ugliest part of the city in the
worst part of the city to make and force
people who want to see we made a
conservatory and put it in there in the
poorest neighborhood so that people who
want to be in this conservatory have to
travel to the poorest neighborhood and
go there and try and change the reality
because if you see around you a horrible
neighborhood
Adder Street no light nothing working
you know what do you turn into and if
you see a nice environment around you
can you change people that way well how
did it work you know it worked for a
while it's hard to know exactly because
also there was a truce between some of
the gangsters there as well for a while
was it related to the construction of
the servitor theme and
the government was involved in the trees
on truce or not but there was for a time
the murder rate did drop quite
dramatically in Marian and I don't have
people have carried on you know but
Marian has improvement Marian Marian
Columbia was the worst the most violent
city in the world back in the 1990s and
it's it's not you know you know people
do like their city now Midian Wow
so it had some impact the absolutely
yeah then the social workers I'm sure
they have some impact on individual
people but I would imagine that the
overwhelming volume of children that are
being recruited there's very hard to put
a real dent in it well I think insid out
why does it had an effect because when
that was the most violent city in the
world around 2010 2011 and now was this
turf war there between the Sinaloa
cartel which is chapo guzman against
local Juarez cartel and there was you
know there was 9,000 killed in that city
over 4 years of that of that war it was
crazy I was carving out it's covering it
then just driving around from sing to
sing to be like yeah massacre here
massacre that is driving around bangbang
these things happening and afterwards
there was a lot of social work put into
the city and Sandra described by Lynn
she said there's a like a waterfall of
aid money coming in there was like us
you know USAID and stuff would start
putting money into this and other
different groups and the murder rate did
really drop so and it hasn't gone back
up to that level since so I think it
does have a real effect when it spurs a
policy you know it does have an effect
on these things but also when you talked
a little while ago about a magic wand on
this I mean in making a police force
that actually protects the community or
making a police force that has some kind
of effect I mean I grew up in England
which is you know pretty safe place
relatively and nice to not like police
and no hate they know be a anti police
would ever growing up and now I
appreciate wow you know you have police
who actually protect the community in
some way and the same in the United
States I mean the United States the
police do protect people to a large
extent compared to these countries and
you know obviously this issues here is
or issue will race
and killing and violence and so forth
but still I think a lot of the people
who who believe that they know a lot of
people believe they have guns for
self-defense and I respect the right to
have guns to self-defense but really in
America you're generally safe because
the police are pretty hard on clamping
down but how do you create a police
force which really has the will to
protect people you know how do you have
that you know with the with the word and
the passion and the commitment to help
people in Mexico that would be that'd be
a dream the people that have dealt with
police officers that are corrupt have a
very difficult time here and what you're
saying right those people would be angry
what you're saying saying no no the
police officers here are corrupt they
are bad there is racism there are real
problems yeah and there is but I think
there's also a real problem being a
police officer period I think police
officers have an insanely difficult job
and I think most of them are dealing
with PTSD I think there's a giant
percentage of them like all over the
world and in America too that are
constantly dealing with violence and the
threat of violence and arresting
criminals and being shot at and people
lying to them I just don't think I think
most people are very ill-equipped to
handle something like that I mean I
agree that there are definitely problems
with the police and there are problems I
mean the police shootings are very real
problems
please killing innocent people here is
very real I need a little for
improvement and you know there's people
families against suffering from that
from that violence I don't want to
belittle this no no you're not I know
you know I just have to sort of clarify
because I know so many people be hearing
this and yeah Mexico is terrible the
United States there's I mean there's a
ton of videos the real issue though is
we're also dealing with the the sheer
number yeah of interactions that police
have with people you know the vast
majority of them are fine
yeah but others tell the other thing
like saved the crime of kidnapping
kidnappings a horrific antisocial crime
and horrific crime destroys lives
there's one video really of video which
really made me sick which was given to a
family of a kid a fourth
your old kid who was taken and they send
this video to his family in Mexico and
they were beating this kid and saying to
this kid you know this is you this you
and the guy who sent the cameras is your
fault you bitch to the mom this is your
fault look how your kids get him being
now you're gonna give me the money so
asking for like was it $300,000
ographers huh and those kind of crimes
now kidnapping doesn't happen in the
United States on a very big level
because you've got effective law
enforcement so some I mean their house I
was at one conference and those you know
real nice real nice guy but those people
calling for the abolition of the police
and they shouldn't be a police force
saying you really want to live like with
no police you would only live with a
dysfunctional police where they can just
kidnap your kid and I send a video to
like that and you've got no protection
from that kind of thing right I mean
there's definitely problems here but
also you've got to see the other side of
having a pretty dysfunctional police
force and what that means it's just such
a staggering difference between the
United States and Mexico in that regard
in regard to gang violence drug violence
just overall murders and the stories
that we hear from over it's so different
the fact that you could just draw a
little line in the dirt you cross that
line you're in hell and then you cross
this line you're in Houston I mean
that's fucking crazy yeah yeah I mean
again I mean I get criticized sometimes
from I met you know sometimes mezack
mitts can government sources or Mexican
tourism sources you know like I'm
covering this stuff so I'm showing the
worst and it can give it a story at
picture sometime because you know when I
tell a story of 49 decapitated bodies
with a handsome figure of people think
wow you know as soon as you say this
stuff and some guy describing to
capitain people with this kind of does
you know if not people outside you know
don't say it as well as that it still is
a great country yeah I still you know I
love the United States but I probably
love Mexico more and what do you love
more about Mexico besides of food I mean
I would say generally the atmosphere is
good I just feel fill people in nice
generally I think despite all of these
horrific violence do you think it's
because
they don't have the same sort of
ruthless ambition that people in the
United States have I think there is a
sense we're talking before about why
people are into drugs and one thing that
occurred to me is this kind of hyper
competitiveness of society and people
can feel like failures like if you feel
like a fairly if you feel like I guess
well maybe social medias affecting this
as well because you see what people have
and you expect you to have more right
and you feel you haven't lived up to it
I think in Mexico people you know if
you're broke in the United States when
you become often maybe feel like a
personal failure how come you're living
in America and you're broke right
whereas in Mexico lots of people are
broke so you like you know you don't
feel that same kind of personal failure
with that I when I'm there one thing
that always strikes me is how happy
people seem and that I think there's a
certain stress level that a lot of
Americans put themselves into where
they're constantly pursuing material
possessions material wealth and success
and that oftentimes this leads to really
exacerbated stress levels and it's not
it doesn't make you happy like the whole
idea of having things in our mind is
someday if I buy this car I'll be happy
if I live in this neighborhood I'll be
happy and then so they work 12 hours a
day to try to achieve that dream and
they're never happy and they're always
stressed out and even though the vast
majority of the United States I mean
there's some insane number like 34 if
you make 135 thousand dollars a year you
are in the top 1% of the world hmm
so there's a giant percentage of this
country that's in the top 1% of the
world yet the overall happiness level is
least from what I've read is quite a bit
below the people in Mexico yeah yeah I
mean yeah a lot of these things I mean
how how do you see your own happiness or
measure your own happiness or sense of
success or failure so yeah so that's
part of it I mean in the food is great
the food is the food the food so my
giant fan of Mexican food here I love it
there's a place down here that I take
the guys here that work here all the
time it is as Mexican as you get no one
speaks English there
they have Mexican soap operas playing on
the television and the food is just
sensational it's so good yeah yeah so um
so some of these things as well as that
but but before you took my at this
border between Mexico and the US yeah
it's it's a huge is that vast difference
between countries and coaches and and
the interaction another issue I guess is
the issue of guns going south and we
talked about oh I didn't come up
it was a lot of firearms a lot of
firearms like that fast and furious deal
yeah well the Eric Holder thing that
went down years ago were they well sold
it was some sort of a sting yeah they
sold guns and those guns wound up being
used to kill Americans and even American
police officers yeah yeah so that was so
the ATF gun off this and this I mean the
number of guns not really sure how many
guns are turned down but there was one
study the they came to conclusion at
about to over 200,000 guns every year go
from the United States into Mexico so
that's an insane number two hundred
thousand guns I know I interviewed a guy
in prison in Seattle Whitis for gun
trafficking and he would drive every
weekend from Mexico of the United States
by like 10 to 15
mostly ar-fifteens some other guns as
well and drive them down into into
Mexico and it's pretty easy to get in
New Mexico so you drive them in it's
like it's a piece of piss very easy you
basically most the time you've got no
control no he would actually hide them
in fridges and stoves and would pay an
import tax for the fridges and stoves
hmm but but he was buying them and he
said shitless I said how did you buy the
guns he said I wouldn't no idea - so
what I did you showed it by your guns he
said are nothing at all had no idea
whatsoever I said no no nothing at all
so do you buy him from gun shows see buy
from gun shows but any what he would do
was he would use the private sale
loophole which they tryna close now yes
so he would go in there and then I went
to the dungeon to a gun show in in
Mesquite in
Greater Dallas area known as the gun
show capital of America
hmm and went to a gun show there and
asked you know people can you sell me
guns you know I'm done live here can you
sell me guns and first I said I know you
need to be texting something oh yes
y'all can sell you these guns and who's
the reason to get out as they say it's a
private sale right however some of them
I know some of the the the pro-gun
people get angry talking about this but
I saw him whoa nice they've got a whole
bunch of boxed up ar-15 rifles and
they're selling them as being private
sellers so yeah
private sell now so he was just simply
buying his guns and taking him down I
saw right in front of me as well
somebody who who said to the person I
can't I can't buy I was looking for a
different gun and said no I can't buy it
I don't have like a carnies ID to buy
the gun I'm and the person will you know
still happy like even the private sale
loophole if you in theory if you suspect
the person is a criminal mm-hmm or we're
using for criminal purposes you
shouldn't sell them the gun but they
don't care and so one thing I mean you
really want to people really want people
who they could it could be ms-13
undocumented they can still walk in and
buy guns on some of these places burr
then yeah so that's that's that's a big
issue as well yes those gun shows were
pretty bizarre yeah you're walking
around with a bunch of people just
itching to shoot somebody they're just
hoping somebody breaks in their house I
know a guy who keeps a gun and his ankle
at all times he keeps one in his back
he's got a he's got a holster that he
carries with him sometimes he carries a
knife as well I mean he's literally
begging for someone to fuck with him mmm
I mean I've got my problem with the
people who like you know I talked to a
guy from the Alaska machine gun
Association he has about 200 guns in his
basement 200 guns and I have a problem
with with with people with doing that
but then there's still like how do you
stop the guns go into criminals to say
I'm the gun the criminals in in
Baltimore right I was saying interviewed
in Baltimore a gun trafficker who's
taking guns into the city of Bodom
the yeah the gun show loophole is very
strange it's very strange that that's
allowed and this is coming from someone
me personally who owns guns and I
believe in the Second Amendment and I
just I don't think that the way to stop
people from doing illegal activities is
to make those activities illegal for
people who don't do anything illegal
you know I think they're the real issue
is the psychology behind people that are
willing to shoot people in the first
place and the deal with the overall
mentality of these human beings and try
to figure out what's wrong with our
society cure it at a base level at a
human level that's what's really wrong
it's not the inanimate object of a gun
that's the problem it's the human beings
that are willing to use these guns to
commit horrific acts that's what I think
but when you have something like drug
cartels which exist or gangs which
exists and then you have this thing
called a gun show and then you have this
gun show loophole well boy you got a
fucking giant hole in your dam you know
you got water pouring right through
right there like how do you not fix that
up if you are a person who believes in
the Second Amendment you believe in
legal and responsible gun use you should
be angry at that because that is that
represents a gigantic problem and that
also represents a threat to legal gun
ownership because if this keeps
happening and people keep getting
outraged and more mass shootings happen
with illegally acquired guns after a
while you know there's there's what's
going to come to some sort of a real
conflict with people yeah I'm actually
doing a new book about gun trafficking
hmm so I'm really interested to hear
about his issues and what the actual
room for compromise is or like we know
or like what someone like yourself who
believes in the Second Amendment
how much room for compromise do you
think there is in on these issues I mean
like closing the gun show loophole the
other thing like for example the issue
of 50 cals yeah now 50 cals
in Mexico the cartels the cartels use 50
cals they used them to set up ambushes
they'll use them to hit military
vehicles police vehicles so they're the
set on the side of a mountain and now 50
cows and I bang bang and I go right
through baseball sized bullets yeah
crazy now imagine if you had quite that
big yeah a big-ass bullet no I know I
understand ups a lot these Mets can
place a military occur up as well but
you know if you are an honest one or
whatever you're going
in a car he's fucking hit by one of
those going to your vehicle then they
open up on you yeah see is there any
room there do you think for like clamp
down on 50 cows I've never heard that
discussion that much I have a friend who
has won an takuna he's got a 50 caliber
it's ridiculous it's clean the idea that
you're using that for self defense
unless you're going to war with Russia
or you know fighting against some gang
cartel gang that's invading your city
that seems that's a military weapon I
mean it's the same argument I think for
having a fighter jet with Hellfire
missiles do I think you should be able
to own a Cessna and fly a little print
plane around
sure okay do I think you should be able
to own a jet well I mean there are a lot
of rich folks at private jets okay
do I think you should be able to own a
fighter jet that goes the speed of sound
look oh I mean it's just a faster jet
right yeah okay okay do you think you
should be able to own a fighter jet with
50 caliber guns strapped to it oh well
what the fuck is that are you starting a
war like what are you doing this is like
these levels that things get too you
know
that's this is the argument against it
automatic weapons you can't use
automatic like certain states have
regulations in terms of what you can't
you know in California you can't even
have a silencer
I don't know why because it's very bad
to have that loud bang of a gun it's
terrible for your ears and if you're a
hunter or someone who likes to shoot
target practice or something that's a
terrible thing for your ears and there's
a suppressor they could put on the end
of the barrel and will mitigate that but
for whatever reason I think mostly
because of films and public perception
people think that those silencers are
only used by assassins or something like
that you're using to kill people so they
they they convert the the
semi-automatics from the states that it
makes going to convert the fully
automatic ass so they they they do that
here too and then of course you know
about bump stocks yeah yes which makes
it much more free with the trigger much
much easier to fire rapidly rather so
how do you feel about the issue you know
one of the issues is of having a
database like the ATF or or they're not
allowed to have a searchable database
on on guns in the United States so they
have like they have locked paper files
and stuff they go through still they
can't have like a digital database on
guns that seems ridiculous doesn't it
yeah um yeah you think they think I'm a
because these are the gun lobby see the
idea of a gun registry as being a step
to taking away their guns because like
once you start registering that you can
go then afterwards and say well we know
where the guns are yeah whatever but how
do you feeling this flexibility on that
issue of like the gun of like having
searchable databases I mean like with a
car like you have a license plate and if
there's a hit-and-run yes type it in and
you know whose car it is within seconds
with gun tracing you can't you know you
find a gun at a crime scene whatever you
can't just trade in and put a button to
go bang Matt's right is they have to go
through paper I have to go through a
whole formal trace mm-hmm and go through
this kind of search see there's
flexibility on that issue as well or how
do you feel about that yourself wife
myself feel there should be a traceable
database I mean if there it's just like
a car and I'm glad you brought up that
analogy because when you when you get a
car you have to know how to drive a car
you have to in order to have a license
to drive a car you have to take a test
you have to take a written test and you
take a physical driving test with an
instructor they have to see and think
about how many more people drive cars
didn't own guns so it's possible to do
this with guns yet it's not done when I
bought my first gun like here you go I
was like what like that's it like yeah
you're not a criminal look we did a
check on you you're not a criminal
here's a gun
I bought a pistol I buy a 38 revolver
that was my first gun and I went to the
the gun range and practiced with the gun
and I read about how to do it and I
talked to an instructor about safety and
put goggles on and ear muffs and you
know make sure you're protected and how
to properly hold the gun while you shoot
and all these different things but it's
stunning to me that you don't have to do
that I mean you can own a hundred and
fifty guns and know how to operate zero
of them and they're all yours you don't
even have to prove you know what the
fucking safety is you don't have to
prove you know anything yes that's crazy
but not me it's fun to shoot guns I'm
not necess I've been doing research with
new pickup and shooting if you
guns in places oh I went over to Serbia
and I arrived in Serbia on a hangover
I'd seen my friends in the UK and got
drunk with them and arrived in a
hangover and I'd met him the contact
down say I wanted to go to a gun club
and he took me into a nuclear bunker
I'm fine ak-47 just at a crazier this is
whatever you want to fight that a crazy
amount of guns there so I can see if
it's fun to fire these things do you
think they actually are good and
self-defense I mean do you actually
think I mean I don't
it makes God I'd have guns I'd I
wouldn't and when I travel in the field
I won't go security and they generally
secure is going to be more of a
hindrance because they attract attention
yet right attention yeah and they've got
a go basically at my hands up and say
this is this is me so I'm doing most of
the situation's there you've got and
have a lot of people with heavy guns
you're not gonna out gun these guys yes
in Central America is a bit different in
Honduras there was with guys with guns
they're not out of choice of choosing
security because the the journalist
himself was carrying a gun and had
friends carrying guns and he was in he
was carrying a mini Uzi was driving this
journalist friend of mine Orlean Castro
his name is great great journalist he
was driving around and he had a mini Uzi
on his lap as he was driving around to
crime scenes and running around doing
stuff hmm
but do you do you think guns are
actually effective for self-defense I
mean do you have guns for self-defense
and believe and that would simply just
enjoy the sport of shooting guns
well I hunt and one of the things I have
used although I archery hunt now most of
the most of the hunts I go on when I go
to these places to to bow hunt
specifically but I have rifles for
hunting
I have handguns for self-defense and it
depends entirely on the situation that's
like saying do you think cars are
effective to get you where you want to
go well they are effective if you drive
carefully and you you know use the
blinkers and look when you change lanes
and you know make sure you observe the
speed limit and all the different laws
and
are aware and don't crash into anybody
but if you're an asshole no they're not
effective you're gonna wind up dying in
a car accident you're gonna flip your
car over in the side of the road if
you're in a terrible situation it is
better to have a gun that did not have a
gun if you know how to use it
if someone's breaking into your house
there has been there is countless
stories of people protecting their
families from from bad guys when they
have guns they these are real stories
they do exist there are people that I've
talked to they mean you can find them
there's countless stories there's also
countless stories of people leaving
their guns unlocked and a child gets a
hold of it and kills himself
accidentally there's there's stories of
children actually only killing their
mothers there's all those stories - so
can a gun be effective in self-defense
for sure that's why the military used
them that's why police officers use them
that's why people train and they go to
the range and they take tactical courses
to learn how to use a gun for
self-defense absolutely a gun can be
used for self-defense it's the best
thing for the best tool for self-defense
other than you know obviously living in
a good neighborhood having a security
alarm all these different steps a dog
dogs are good especially a dog there's a
trained dog
but yeah guns absolutely can protect you
if you're in a situation someone breaks
in your house and you shoot that person
dead that's you you're safer then that
person killing you that has happened but
it's a this is a that me this is a gross
generalization that's an entirely
dependent upon the situation that you
find yourself in but if you're not if
you're not protected by if you don't
understand how to use it if you're not
trained if you don't if you don't have
training to keep your shit together when
things go south because when you're in a
situation and your life is in danger if
you've never been in a high-pressure
situation before how do you know you can
keep it together and even hit something
you're aiming at people have wild
trigger panic and they have a really
hard time dealing with life-or-death
situations if they haven't served in the
military or been in some very very
high-stress situations we have to learn
how to control yourself under
extreme pressure conditions there's a
lot there's a lot of factors there but I
would say the same thing it's like you
you would also say that with martial
arts like can you defend yourself if you
know martial arts well it depends on
what you know I mean some martial arts
are fucking horseshit you you just a lot
of people out there practicing nonsense
and if someone who actually knew how to
fight just punched him in the face they
would be doomed and then there's other
people out there that are experts that
would be very calm if someone tried to
fight them and they would know what to
do what not to do and if the person
wasn't armed they would be able to
easily dispatch them it really is
dependent upon the situation how much
effort you've put into it how much
thought you put into it and but there's
a lot of people out there but if you
broke into their house you're making a
huge mistake because they're trained and
prepared and ready because they don't
want to be a victim and it doesn't mean
they're bad people and I think we we
have a problem in this country where we
look at things
they're very binary they're 1 or 0
they're good or bad guns are bad guns
are always bad I don't want a gun bad
guys take your gun sometimes sure
sometimes sometimes you kill the bad guy
and you protect your family though -
that's real - yeah no I've respect for
people having having guns for
self-defense we're talking about about
shooting I've been around a few
shootouts in Latin America and an over
in Haiti and one thing about that from
from a journalists point of view and
being around and I've been seeing a lot
of violence as well a lot people
fighting even going back to England
people having physical fights or with
knives and that kind of thing
so one of the differences I think with
guns is in its fight you can't see
bullets it's like a small thing but like
you can't see the thing that's hurting
when you see a guy with a knife right
it's like the guy's scary you can see
you can imagine that knife sticking into
you but the gun is like you're seeing
you know the object you can't see really
they're the bullet going in so one of
the times one of the times I shows in
Haiti and I went in to cover the
earthquake in 2010 which was you know
real sad you know like crazy amount of
dead there and we were covering the
looting afterwards and
the police came and started firing right
into where people were looting nose with
a cameraman and the police would find
bang bang and then and it during the
same situation not not right in that
scene there but in another scene they
shot and killed somebody the police just
firing other looters and all the loot
started running when the police were
firing over fahren again with it how
high were they farm they were firing you
know bang find it put it down and the
cameraman I was with was just sat down
he was like filming this and I think
this is one of the problems that while a
lot of cameramen get shot in these
places you start feeling like you're
watching on TV oh wow because you feel
like you know your signal is loud it's
amazing look what look at what I'm
watching yeah and you're seeing this and
it's like not saying that one we got a
go like the fire in who's like because
I'm going to give the shot we could go
there's another sad sad thing of a guy
filming American journalist called
Bradley Rowan will rest in peace who was
killed in Mexico back in 2006 and he was
filming a shooting in state of Oaxaca
and he filmed these Glee's guys shooting
and he fell and was hit and it carried
on filming oh wow every filmed his own
death I mean you can do it really
literally see there yeah sad has worked
for News Agency when that day when he
was when he was killed in yeah there's a
lot of courageous camera people and you
know they get locked into that job and
it becomes normalized almost like you
were saying the people that live in
these war-torn areas it becomes a normal
way of life to them and although there
are a lot of murders if you're there on
a daily basis it seems like almost like
a regular life a lot of these cameramen
I mean they're courageous people you see
these guys who go over to war zones and
film what's going on in Afghanistan you
know and I've met some of these guys
that's just it's a crazy way of life to
just accept the fact that you're an
observer that might be a victim and
you're capturing all this so people like
me can get a some sin
perception to what's going on in that
part of the world or whatever to the
Philippines southern Philippines and saw
the fight against the Islamic state
there in 2017 and it was interesting
seeing that compared to violence our
cover normal in in Mexico so that was
Isis they took over the city called
Marawi and it was an error they caught
it was it was interesting was more
self-contained they had a miracle the
main battle area they mmbf it main
battle area so in that area was Isis and
the Philippine Army just gunned that all
the time just like a constant bang bang
bang bang bang and planes going over and
bombing but actually even when you're
outside that main area even if you're in
a woods outside it and even if you're
like 600 meters or 600 meters from it
but it's you're not in the fighting the
fighting is over there whereas in some
like Mexico South America a lot of time
this fighting is kind of happening
everywhere there's no real control over
when where the main battle area is but
they didn't really let any journalists
inside like deep into the main battle
air and didn't really let any journalist
in was sitting outside and hearing this
constant ricochet of gunfire and but
sometimes bullets will come out of the
area so there was an Australian guy and
I think he bent over to pick up some
cookies and a bullet him in the neck oh
I saw the x-ray actually the bullet
embedded in the side of his neck Annetta
he'd say it was taken out so it must
have been at the end of its terminal
velocity yeah yeah so it must've been a
far far far shot yeah yeah it went
through something else for it hit him
yeah yeah yeah so so he say him
everything going too fast there's a
crazy though I didn't exactly say it was
kind of a thing he's okay
yeah I think he's okay he's okay with it
well that guy's lucky yeah it's shot in
the neck and you're okay yeah so but but
yeah in terms of you know some of the
people have really been in there was
there with the head of one of the guys
um one of the police special force guys
had a camera on his helmet and he went
he showed me that footage and he was
right there right inside there going
there like really really close building
fighting with these Islamic Isis people
and it was the same techniques I thought
were generally he had a big chart
showing how the techniques of guerrilla
warfare had evolved from like Fallujah
Aleppo Mosul and how this kind of weird
new form of guerrilla warfare they have
of like fighting house-to-house um so
the business is suicidal kind of
guerrilla war they rise up and they'll
be like you know super close fighting
really close I was and then when they're
born they had hired in like you know
basements and stuff and they drill holes
in the wall so they could fire through
and fire through and the footage he had
he showed me the footage he had from
being like right inside close-up like
running victory in a room bang taking
these people out and it was like wow
this is just crazy I was trying to
persuade the guy to let me put that
footage out there you know the kind of
crazy video game kind of cooler warfare
okay called a wolf another cool cool
call of Cornelia called a good of Judea
I mean Mexico right now is almost like a
war I mean you can call it a drug war
but because there's no it's not like an
army versus army war we don't think
about it that way but from in terms of
the amount of violence that goes on over
there and the amount of casualties it
rivals anything that's going on in the
world right now yeah so I'll be talking
a lot about this over the years and with
some like experts is a good writer
called Robert bunker who's an external
researcher for the Pentagon and he
investigates this stuff is a guy called
John Sullivan from here in California as
a police officer who also did a bunch of
research and you know got a doctorate in
in starting all this stuff as well
talk to them about their ideas about
what this means you know what is the how
to define this in terms of warfare you
know how's it fit in and they directed
me to one book by an Israeli historian
called the transformation of war and
this was written back in the early 1990s
and he basically predicted then you're
going to see a transformation in war and
armed conflict around the world and you
know we have like nuclear weapon
but they're useless in these situations
in a nuclear weapons you can use a
nuclear weapon to solve the problem in
Mexico you can't use a nuclear weapon to
deal with the Islamic state you know
these are internal insurgencies in
countries so if you look at Mexico so
kind of weird hybrid hybrid so between
crime and war so I use the working farm
wars in some of these places so Mexico
El Salvador Guatemala Honduras where you
have na mele there are some situations
in Mexico where you know the corner
there was a group who called the Jalisco
new generation cartel some of their guys
shot down a military helicopter using an
RPG seven Wow
they killed eight soldiers in a federal
policemen in the helicopter
there was one shootout which involved
2,000 federal police and 500 sicarios
like five hundred cartel hitmen had this
crazy battle Mitchel tan so sometimes
you actually get I see it starts to look
more like kind of regular conflict but
generates all you know what way more
kind of hybrid there's kind of weird mix
and such trying to get my head round
this for a long time for some years I
was fond of thinking is this a civil war
room should we look at this and then it
become like a this and then it was
Robert bunker when he when I talk to him
one time and he said you know like this
doesn't fit into these theories you know
it's not quite war it's more than crime
it's a weird hybrid in between it's a
kind of crime war and that's the way you
got understand these these things but a
lot of the the conflicts around the
world today this is spreading I mean you
look up Somalia you look at Libya you
look a lot of these places it kind of
weird mix instability yeah and then this
is what a lot of refugees are fleeing
from and I was down in Tijuana Christmas
I followed the migrant caravan that came
through Mexico Central Americans you
know which caused a big big storm here
here for the election what was that like
was that overblown I think it was a big
deal was it a publicity event like is
that why they were doing it making it
such a big deal in everybody
walking towards the border look there is
a bit more than that I think they were
there was there this caravans had
started a few years ago and they started
off in Mexico for security they were an
issue back a few years ago where the
cartels would kidnap migrants on mass
they would just get loads of migrants
now you think these people are poor how
can they make money from them but they'd
get them put them in camps and they know
they have family in the United States so
they say oK we've got 50 people in the
camp we want $5,000 off each one of you
off your family now give us the number
we're gonna call your family okay send
us the money dad and then some of they
did grilling okay mm you know it sounds
like you know you're making money out of
poor people right but you do it on mass
you do it 10,000 people and you get a
couple of thousand dollars each that's
like you know twenty thousand dollars
two hundred mil a two hundred million
dollars so they started doing caravans
for strength to avoid these mass
kidnappings what was different about the
latest Caravan the a she became became a
caravan crossing borders they used to be
going through parts of Mexico together
then they started crossing borders now
that Caravan began in October around
October 12th and there was a call for
them to meet and my friend Orlean again
the journeys down in Honduras he was
down there filming with his TV crew
putting on TV are they down here they're
going on this Caravan and Sonny went
boom and like lows people saw it on TV
and they're like I'm going I'm leaving
I'm leaving now the desperation was so
heavy and a Honduras isn't a real
meltdown kind of staged Honduras is bad
Venezuela's worse but Honduras might be
like number two fire you know real
meltdown cases in Latin America right
now so people were like nice to talk to
some these people they would say like I
saw it on TV and I was that's it I'm
going to decide it right away I'm gonna
get my bad I'm gonna go so they arrived
at the when they they went through a
Guatemalan to Guatemala
you know they became big like 7,000
people arrive at the the border with
Mexico and you know first of all they
try to know that they there was a push
and shove on the border and tear gas was
fired and they went down and crossed
River and some of them walking across
with a rope some of them going across on
tires it was kind of crazy scene you
know this scene down there was squatted
half the bridge and then there came this
it was kind of kind of a big deal I know
the idea of calling him an invading army
and so forth it was obviously ever blown
but like I think it was significant
scenes quite historic things that were
happening down there
and what was the overall goal to make it
through to the United States yeah I mean
you know different people had different
ideas it was kind of on his weird things
you know like it was go to the United
States now some people had no idea where
they would go and had no real plan some
people some had very clear cases of
being I'm a refugee you know
understanding a bit about refugee
legislation and I'm not fleeing very
specific cases where they've been
targeted by gangs working with corrupt
police who want to kill them who have
like hacked them and they've run and
like I want to seek refuge in the United
States or in Mexico
someone was seeking refuge in Mexico was
not the safest place to secret like
there's been cases of people who have
one camera man I know who fed Honduras
and then was killed in Mexico has there
ever been ever any discussion of the
United States military intervening and
trying to do something about the cartels
so there's been like a us you know some
US forces like u.s. marshals
sometimes you the Mexico is very proud
of its Constitution I'm very proud of
its sovereignty and doesn't want us
force acting in Mexico and I think the
idea really of US military military is
pretty out there how it's pretty you
know like it wouldn't help if he's be
bogged down into more problems and and
they've been after in Mexico for that
but there have been some cases of us
doing some kind of activity in Mexico
like for example when they went off the
chapel's man when they got him and
there's a big shootout no they've got in
the first time I see without shots fired
and and then he went to prison and
escaped that one escaped from where he's
escaped more than once really escaped
twice yeah did he get
helicoptered out once know the happy
prison is happy and heading yeah which
is crazy
yeah he had the one tunnel escape with
the electric bike yeah which is crazy
yeah yeah the one he went to the John
and went to the bathroom step behind the
door and he's gone that was insane
it was really weird when I went to New
York right now seeing him in the court
in New York like seeing him in the flesh
after all these years covering this
stuff and I saw him and it was like I've
been to his village before I talked to
his mother I stayed the night with his
cousin in his village Wow up in the
mountains you know seen what's it like
up there it's you know quite rugged
mountains Sierra Madre it's like you go
in a car up and like we were in a 4x4
serious off-road up and down and there's
people we're not wandering around
they're fully armed left I saw guys like
ski mask one guy like camouflage gear
camera gear ski mask ak-47 just like or
not quad bikes just driving around the
area Wow and we went up there with a
colleague and a photographer the story
for Time magazine and we were up there
and drove into the village and I bought
a bottle of whiskey thinking to kind of
offer to the sort of family remembered
sailing his away his a bottle of whiskey
- and when we arrived there and he said
we could stay at his house and I bought
our bottle of whisky so they know his
and he said we don't drink in this house
with Christians Wow if we drink and and
this is nice guy name was like
evangelical Christian Wow cousin and he
would sit there talking and he'd be like
quoting the Bible whoa and come and
stuff and who knows like exuse and I'll
understand and there's a church it's an
evangelical church right there which is
supposedly built by chapel but his
mother goes to right in front of her
house and we sat through a three-hour
evangelical service
sitting there with you know chapels mum
there and all these family members were
sitting there and McCartney was said and
we've got some friends here because he
won't
he was basically what he said like you
stay with me you know you're my
responsibility if someone happens you
know I don't have to pay for this right
so we're like yeah we're gonna behave
ourselves and you know in the village
and and he said during the chairs I
don't we want to also have up we have
somebody from England here and somebody
from the US and come out in this in this
church ceremony so yeah a really really
bizarre scenes up there and there was so
bizarre did you talk to them about the
contradiction of being an evangelical
Christian being involved in essentially
a mass murder and drug running operation
so I said the cousin is supposedly and
he was like a cattle rancher now then
exactly you know obviously he's he calls
you know he either know how much he
might been involved in the past but his
his he says he's he's he's a farmer
there and the mother Chapo's mother
who's 88 was 88 there now is like 89 90
now you know she talks about her son
with kind of pride I didn't I didn't
push too hard there's a man around and
stuff in that pushed too hard in liner
but but yeah I mean they this is this is
their way of life I mean Aziza so seeing
him in the Corps was kind of bizarre
seeing in a seeing him right there and
in New York who's ridin Brooklyn you
know right Aaron Brooks
yeah and they bought in all of these
crazy characters as a cooperating
witnesses they brought in 14 cooperating
witnesses on a bunch of other gangs how
does it protect those people yeah I mean
heavily heavily protected I mean I think
I think it was ethically very
questionable why they bought a lot those
people in and they were they bought in
one guy whose nickname is Chiappetta who
confessed himself to as many as 150
killings and maybe did a lot more and
and he makes a deal likely makes a deal
to cooperate against El Chapo so you get
into a kind of weird intrigue there mmm
about what the government was doing this
whole case there's a history that in
this country with prosecuting the mob
John Gotti and Sammy the bull Gravano
who was a admitted murderer and talked
about the murder so that he committed
and still they allowed him and get free
hmm yeah one of his when I hit John got
his lawyer with one of the lawyers for a
chapel of course yeah and I think or
somebody's lawyers there it was a crazy
kind of show yeah it was weird it was
like in a New York and the show they
were putting on there yeah I felt kind
of disconnect with the things I've been
seeing over the last few years and they
didn't really why was it in New York you
know they they indict him in a bunch of
places and I think they chose New York
for the reason they wanted more of a
show well I think I think they they
bought in a more than 50 witnesses you
know through another three months of
trial what was his defense so they
really try to be of a defense of they
wanted to be a defense of how there's a
kind of concealment conspiracy of like
showing things like fast and furious you
mentioned like saying oh how come the
government's trafficking guns in cartels
and one of the witnesses had before one
of the witnesses against him before use
this weird defense called public
authority saying he had permission from
the United States government to traffic
drug so basically saying there's a kind
of conspiracy involving the Mexican
government's totally corrupt and working
with cartels hmm the US government is
corrupt and working cartels and having
various agencies
I know chapo is kind of a fool guy that
they're putting this blame on hmm now
that didn't really the gut the US
prosecutors shut that down and the judge
they just said you can't talk about this
stuff you can't say that so when Fast
and Furious came up they said no you
can't talk about it you can't talk about
we couldn't talk about it in a court
well that's ethically ambiguous like
that's a real thing that happened yeah
so these he can't talk about it and then
the defense tried a bit well they had a
audios of the earth chat bonus he'll
already know how you know it's him
and is he really the main guy in Sinaloa
cartel now there is was well very
possibly he's not the top gardeners in
our hotel there might well be another
guy
miles and bother who's rooted the number
one and he might be more of an
emblematic figure but for some reason El
Chapo became the most famous in the
world and so this other guys he's still
free he's still free what is his name
again
my OHS and bother and where's he in
somewhere in mind it's a Mexican throw
is in the mountains often I mean what
are these weird things you think like if
you're drug lord and you've got all of
the money you know you've got millions
billions they say let's say hundreds of
millions they only exaggerate how much
money some of these guys have
individually but then you could go
anywhere in the world you think you
could go somewhere out but these guys
tend to be in places they're there
they're there people like some of these
people are people who are very educated
I'm a little chapel who's was a kid he
was carrying sacks full of oranges to
sell almost no education and they start
handling hundred the billions of dollars
that dealing with a billion dollar
international business and they've got
the capacity to understand and deal with
that but at the same time they're still
really hyper local mmm in some ways
they're still like people who they
understand their world they understand
it from their environment to control
them become masters in their environment
to become kind of powerful in in that
place Nord in that place but you know
they couldn't know the idea of them
going to like sitting in Italy in a cafe
and kind of run it from there they don't
it's gonna be on there we'd have to be
there near the business cuz otherwise
someone will just take it over right
yeah yeah yeah yeah how we have to run
that thing with an iron fist yeah I mean
you could think they'd or maybe like
yeah I guess so you get your Christian
cousin you want rip you off yeah
so how much money do you need to make
right all right hey can you get out
maybe when it again with corruption I
mean there's the issue of like a lot of
police in Mexico poor so that's why they
take deals but there's an ex-governor
called Thomas Addington who I met a few
years ago when he was governor of
Tamaulipas state and again he was not
only taking money from drug traffickers
after he left being govern he going to
drug trafficking himself
and it's like you think well once you've
made a couple of million right do you
need to make an R ten million but then
again the same with with I don't
understand business will be dance which
it was that incentive why do they think
they always want to make more money I
don't know I mean we were talking about
that recently with Jeff Bezos when we
found out even has a hundred and fifty
billion dollars like when do you just
say we're good we're good I mean I don't
know I I think it becomes it's a game
more than it is anything else
like there might as well be playing
Parcheesi or monopoly or what are
they're trying to win you know they're
trying to constantly win and also you
have an obligation because you're a CEO
of this company so you you're running
this enormous business that's earning
money for all these other people as well
it's all very complicated though that it
has to do with a lot of psychological
factors where people can't put things
into perspective and they get caught up
in the race mmm yeah yeah drug
traffickers are thinking that same thing
yeah because when they're making I mean
also they like like you know people have
explained to me involved in this world
they make a lot of money but they spend
a lot of money oh yeah why these numbers
of wrong with chapo they they said I'm
he's worth 14 billion dollars that's
what the US government said in that case
he's worth 14 billion but then he's you
know he was paid to me you know 14
billion is when you take the value of
drugs you're saying he he trafficked and
you're hiding the happiness 14 billion
dollars worth but really all the time
you're paying back suppliers you're
paying people off your own money and you
know and you know you're buying Hippos
and yet gold-covered rolls-royce's yeah
listen though some of that I think you
know some of that was my been
exaggerated with him he had a lot of
kind of more like middle-class houses oh
yeah I went to one of the last the last
hideout he was courting it was more like
a middle class it was a normal haha a
house but you have a lot of those what
the fuck happened with Sean Penn yeah
why was Sean Penn up there talking to
him that was so strange
yeah the photograph of Sean Penn shaking
hands and then Conor McGregor wore that
same shirt and he was but he was gonna
fight Eddie Alvarez I believe it was mmm
yeah what was that about
why was Sean Penn visiting him here
bizarre moment I mean you have a a an
actor who's played gangsters areas right
there yeah an actor who's played
gangsters with a gangster who they're
having in a movies made about him and
there was a woman that Sean Penn knew
that hooked this all up reveal that
she's a famous Mexican actress yeah yeah
yeah so so the store whole story start
there she is yeah look at them all
piling around hey me with a murder
so this nice to be married to Madonna
the story spider Kate the Castillo you
see there mmm she was an actress in a TV
series about drug traffickers which have
now become a huge deal in that America
hmm
they could like telenovelas means like
soap operas kind of thing series TV
series and the whole bites they made
about drug traffickers which are really
popular and Seussian one called Lorena
del Sur the queen of the south and in
that she played this drug trafficker and
afterwards in some kind of weird moment
afterwards I think she was like really
into her role and stuff she came out
with this message she wrote saying you
know Mexico since such a tragic
situation in Mexico you know why don't
they come in a drug traffickers common
like traffic with love I trust you more
than I do the government which these are
kind of sentiments that some people have
but it now it was kind of a strange
thing kind of be able to out there thing
for a for a TV star to say mmm and then
chapo el chapo apparently became kind of
enamored with her seeing her on TV and
they started kind of communication now
Sean Penn then got involved in this and
was like I'm gonna go there as well and
we can talk about the idea you know the
10th of the meeting was as well talking
about making of movie or TV series of
his
Gouri hmm Chapel giving the rights to
Kate the Castillo and Sean Penn was kind
of involved in this somehow now Sean
Penn has a bit of discussion not now
that Sean Penn and Kate the Castillo
fell out over this they have different
versions of what happened there but now
Sean Penn decided to go and write this
story for Rolling Stone about hard
experience yeah
so they went then and this meeting was
arranged and they went up to the
mountains and when that photo was taken
and ie that point it he didn't actually
give an interview to Sean Penn but they
had a dinner and had a meeting up in the
mountains and and then left and then
they were meant to afterwards there was
then a big attempt to hit Chapel but he
escaped so that's when some people say
that the Mexican government had followed
them and you know used their their tres
to try and get to a chapel hmm but he
did escape he almost got caught close to
there quite soon after us but escaped it
makes sense I mean how else would Sean
Penn be able to slide through he's a
famous actor I bet he doesn't even speak
Spanish yeah II think it does I mean I
don't know if so if he was followed I'm
not saying that he was um in any case in
any way deliberately no I'm leading them
there but it's something that I think
about all the time I think about okay if
I'm gonna meet criminals
am I being followed well and am I gonna
lead you know what's my connection with
lauren force much conversing with
criminals it's a very difficult thing
that I've been balancing and thinking
about for long years so anyway the chapo
escapes and then said he couldn't meet
up again for the interview because he
was it was too hot for him so they made
this video interview where he was sent
some questions and he videoed himself
answering the questions hmm which is
kind of interesting was the first kind
of statement he made and he said I know
various things I've been doing it since
I was 15 he didn't really give much away
and then he was caught and when he was
caught they were like we've got to move
the stories and then the story came out
like bang after he was caught in early
2016 so it had to have some sort of an
impact and
catching him must've I mean it's
possible it makes sense yeah it's
possible I mean chap I think was pretty
you know he'd already been caught before
he was caught in 2014 was imprison
escaped in 2015
through that tunnel and then was caught
again in 2016 so yeah I mean maybe it
had an impact on you know I don't know
but they were looking for him yeah they
were looking for him and they simply
seem to have lost a lot of its
protection you know he before in I got
Mike a few years I know he had enormous
protection you know and there's
mountains I mean in the village you see
there's a house above like there's kind
of main clearing where his mother's
compound is I know it's a pretty basic
still that village
then our up from there you see a house
on a hill and apparent a swell Chapel
for a long time he's are going to stay
in their house you know anyone is in the
run in the past he had so much
protection anytime the military will
come close or the mountain you've got
hundreds of people you know radio saying
they're coming up get clear man what a
crazy world you study really it's a it's
amazing I really appreciate you coming
here and talking to me about this and
this book is El narco do you have more
books that are available yeah sure said
my first book sell NACA my second book
is a gangster warlords which also has
stuff on the ms-13 on the gangs in
Brazil the gangs in Jamaica as well as
Mexico and I'm working on my third book
now and the third book is about about
gun trafficking hmm well listen man I
really appreciate your time and you
you've lived a very very fascinating
life stay safe out there man great to be
here thank you brother appreciate it
thank you thank you very much
[Music]
Wow